README.md, before:

This is the source distribution of Praktomat, a programming course manager.

**Note:** *This is a fork of the original Praktomat repository (https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/). We created the fork because maintainers of the original repository were not responsive in merging pull requests and/or giving us commit rights. The repository contains the version of Praktomat as used at the University of Applied Sciences Offenburg, Germany. We believe that our changes are of general interest and not specific to our setup.*

Resources
=========

* Bug tracker: https://github.com/hso-praktomat/praktomat/issues
* Running Praktomat under docker: https://github.com/hso-praktomat/praktomat-docker
* Running Checkers for Praktomat with docker: https://github.com/hso-praktomat/praktomat-checkers
* Moderated [mailing list] for Praktomat administrators: praktomat-users@lists.kit.edu.

Python 3.5
==========
  The Praktomat currently requires Python 3.5

  On Ubuntu 16.04, Python3.5 is installed by default,
  but you may need to install the packages

    python-setuptools
    python-psycopg2
    python-virtualenv


General setup
=============

You need the latest version of `pip`that is compatible with the Python version used.
We also highly recommend to use `virtualenv` so your system Python installation remains clean.

If you are having trouble with

    pip install

and get a **No matching distribution found** or **Could not fetch URL** error,
try adding -v to the command to get more information:

    pip install --upgrade -v pip

If you see an error like **There was a problem confirming the ssl certificate** or **tlsv1 alert protocol version or TLSV1_ALERT_PROTOCOL_VERSION**, you need to be connecting to PyPI with a newer TLS support library.

Reason: PyPI turned off support for TLS versions 1.0 and 1.1 in April 2018
   https://pyfound.blogspot.com/2017/01/time-to-upgrade-your-python-tls-v12.html

To fix this, it might help to run the following command:

    pip install -U pip virtualenv setuptools wheel urllib3[secure]

Prerequisites: Database and Webserver
============
  We recommend to run Praktomat within Apache, using PostgreSQL as database management system.

  On a Debian or Ubuntu System, install the packages

    postgresql
    apache2-mpm-worker         (<= Ubuntu 14)
    apache2
    libapache2-mod-macro       (<= Ubuntu 14, removed in Ubuntu 16)
    libapache2-mod-wsgi-py3
    libapache2-mod-xsendfile   (version 0.12; or install version 1.0 manually)
    apache2-dev                (used by pip while installing mod_wsgi)


Pitfalls while Systemupgrades
============
  In Ubuntu 16 the package `apache2-mpm-worker` has been merged into `apache2`.
  Before upgrading to Ubuntu 16 or higher and you are in Ubuntu 14 or lower versions, than you have to edit

    /var/lib/apt/extended_state

  there change entry

    Package: apache2
    Architecture: amd64
    Auto-Installed: 1

  to

    Auto-Installed: 0

  If you don't change that value, apache2 package becomes deleted while upgrading Ubuntu.

Pitfalls after Praktomat-Update (Summer 2022)
=================

A note about `prlimit`
----------
  To make Praktomat compatible with newer Python versions, we introduce a dependency to binary executable program `prlimit`.

    util-linux (containing prlimit)

  If you have installed `util-linux` but the command `prlimit` remain unknown, your linux system may be too old.
  On some circumstances you can build `prlimit` from scources ( more about this cf. https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/pull/342#issuecomment-1219445202 )


 A note about SQLite3 and Praktomat's unit tests
----------

Unit tests which are testing Praktomat code are using `SQLite3` as database backend, depending on settings in `Praktomat/src/settings/test.py`.

Since merge of feature boxplot-taskstatistic (cf https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/pull/345 ) at 2022-07-27
your Python environment is using an too old `SQLite3` version, if tests fails with message:


    django.db.utils.OperationalError: near "(": syntax error while migrating migrationfile taskstatistics.0001_initial_TaskStatisticsDBview


In example, `SQLite3` version 3.16.2 dated to 2017-01-06 is much too old to handle the handwritten migration file `Praktomat/src/taskstatistics/migrations/0001_initial_TaskStatisticsDBview.py` correctly.

That migration file uses *SQL window functions*, which were standardized in `SQL:2003` and covered by `SQLite3` with version 3.25.0 dated to 2018-09-15. But, because of some bugs inside `SQLite3`, you cannot use that first version supporting *SQL window functions*, too.

Please use `SQLite3` Version 3.38.5 from 2022-05-06, which works for our needs.

Check your Python - SQLite dependency on command line via:

```bash
$ python -c "import sqlite3; print(\"... uses pysqlite \" + sqlite3.version +\" with SQLite \" + sqlite3.sqlite_version);"

... uses pysqlite 2.6.0 with SQLite 3.38.5
```


A note about Python and dependencies to Tcl/Tk
----------

 Since merge of feature boxplot-taskstatistic (cf https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/pull/345 )
 users can have a look onto whisker-boxplot diagrams.
 These diagrams where generated via `matplotlib`, which can be installed via `pip` and is listed in our `requirements` file.
 `matplotlib` loads transitive `_tkinter` module, which you cannot install via `pip`, and which have dependencies to system libraries for Tcl/Tk. (There exists a package installable via `pip` named `tk` but that package has nothing to do with what you need...)

 You can check, if your Python version and your system fullfill that dependencies in a shell:

     python -c "import lzma" && python -c "import _tkinter" && python -c "import -c"matplotlib.pyplot as plt"

 That commands should not produce any error messages.

 If `lzma` couldn't be imported, then you need to install the system library and dev package:

    apt-get install liblzma-dev lzma -y -q

 If `_tkinter` failed to load, then perhaps on your system the `_tkinter` module can be installed for your Python on a separate way.
 In example, on Debian you install the tkinter-support via system package manager:

    apt install python3-tk -y -q

 And of course you need tcl/tk on the system:

    apt install tk tk-dev

**Hint:** Praktomat's DejaGnuChecker uses `dejagnu`, which is written in `expect`. And `expect` is using `Tcl`.



Prerequisites: 3rd-Party libraries and programms
============

  Praktomat requires some 3rd-Party libraries programs to run.
  On a Ubuntu/Debian System, these can be installed by installing the following packages:

    util-linux (containing prlimit)

    libpq-dev
    zlib1g-dev
    libmysqlclient-dev (or: default-libmysqlclient-dev)
    libsasl2-dev
    libssl-dev
    libffi-dev
    openssl (for signing E-Mails)
    swig

    openjdk-11-jdk (or: openjdk-8-jdk)
    junit
    junit4
    dejagnu

    git-core

    libldap2-dev (if you want to use python-ldap==2.3.13 for connecting to ldap)

    r-base

  If you're going to use Praktomat to check Haskell submissions, you will also require the packages:

    ghc libghc-test-framework-dev libghc-test-framework-hunit-dev libghc-test-framework-quickcheck2-dev

 For Checkstyle, we recommend getting checkstyle-all-4.4.jar or checkstyle-8.14-all.jar

    https://github.com/checkstyle/checkstyle/releases/

  Documentation for checkstyle please see: https://checkstyle.org/

 If you want your users to submit Isabelle theories, add the following line to
 /etc/mime.types:

    text/x-isabelle thy


Some words of folder layout to Developer, Testing and Deployment-Setup
=====================================================

We have changed the folder layout, to keep repository-folders clean.
The name PraktomatSupport was ambiguous to us, so we change it.
=> Folders for UPLOAD_ROOT and SANDBOX_DIR and STATIC_ROOT changed.

Python variable UPLOAD_ROOT points to debug-data, test-data or work-data
dependig on manage-devel.py, manage-test.py or manage-local.py.

Python variable SANDBOX_DIR points to a folder inside UPLOAD_ROOT.

Semester folder:
```
.
  |-Praktomat   <= this is only the repository
  |  |-documentation
  |  |-media
  |  |-examples
  |  |-src
  |  |-docker-image
  |  |-wsgi
  |-static
  |-debug-data
  |  |-CheckerFiles
  |  |-SolutionArchive
  |  |-SolutionSandbox
  |-work-data
  |  |-CheckerFiles
  |  |-SolutionArchive
  |  |-SolutionSandbox
  |-test-data
  |  |-CheckerFiles
  |  |-SolutionArchive
  |  |-SolutionSandbox
```

In some files there are information that you have to change for your need:
```
Praktomat/src/settings/devel.py
Praktomat/src/settings/local.py
Praktomat/src/settings/test.py
Praktomat/src/checker/scripts/cTestrunner
Praktomat/src/checker/scripts/java.policy
Praktomat/src/checker/scripts/junit.policy
```

You can deactivate checkers and compilers in your local Praktomat instance,
just comment them out in ``` src/checker/checker/__init__.py ``` and ``` src/checker/compiler/__init__.py ```.
Do not forget to create and run a django migration in that case.

If you exchange Praktomat-Tasks (export and import) than the instance, which is used to import the task,
must have activated all needed checkers and compilers which are configured in the that task.


Developer and Tester setup
===============

Clone this repo and install the required python libs to either your system-wide
Python installation or inside a designated virtualenv (recommended).
The following describes a recommended setup using virtualenv.

```bash
git clone --recursive git://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat.git
virtualenv -p python3 --system-site-packages env/
. env/bin/activate
pip install -U pip virtualenv setuptools wheel urllib3[secure]
pip install -r Praktomat/requirements.txt
```

The initial database setup follows.
In standard development configuration `Praktomat/src/settings/devel.py`
and in configuration `Praktomat/src/settings/test.py` for running django unit tests against Praktomat
the databases are SQLite files.
   - 'UPLOAD_ROOT+/Database+PRAKTOMAT_ID' for development
   - 'UPLOAD_ROOT+/DjangoTestDatabase+PRAKTOMAT_ID' for unittesting
which are created by python on the fly.

```bash
cd Praktomat
mkdir ../debug-data/
./src/manage-devel.py migrate --noinput
./src/manage-devel.py createsuperuser
```

Start the development server.

```bash
./src/manage-devel.py runserver
```

or

```bash
pip install Werkzeug
./src/manage-devel.py runserver_plus
```

to run django unit tests

```bash
cd Praktomat
mkdir ../test-data/
./src/manage-test.py test accounts attestation checker configuration solutions tasks taskstatistics hbrs_tests
```


Deployment installation (using Apache and PostgreSQL)
=======================

Like for the development version, clone the Praktomat and install its dependencies:

```bash
git clone --recursive git://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat.git
virtualenv -p python3 --system-site-packages env/
. env/bin/activate
pip install -U pip virtualenv setuptools wheel urllib3[secure]
pip install -r Praktomat/requirements.txt
```

Now create a database. Using postgres on Ubuntu, this might work for creating
a database "praktomat_<PRAKTOMAT_ID>". Also edit `pg_hba.conf` to allow the access.
Your database-system should be configured to UTF-8.

To find your `pg_hba.conf` run on server commandline

```bash
cd / && cat $( sudo -u postgres psql -c 'SHOW config_file' | grep '\.conf') | grep 'pg_hba.conf' && cd ~
```
Edit that file to your needs. (Per default only connections to localhost are configured.)

```bash
sudo systemctl enable postgresql
sudo systemctl start postgresql
sudo systemctl status postgresql
sudo -u postgres createuser -DRS praktomat
sudo -u postgres createdb --encoding UTF8 -O praktomat praktomat_<PRAKTOMAT_ID>
```

The postfix <PRAKTOMAT_ID> of database name in above creation statement have to reflect the value of the python variable PRAKTOMAT_ID in `Praktomat/src/settings/local.py`.

Configure Praktomat in `Praktomat/src/settings/local.py`, which contains all settings and paths for your deployment system, too.

Create the upload directory, populate the database:

```bash
cd Praktomat
mkdir ../work-data/
./src/manage-local.py collectstatic --noinput --link
./src/manage-local.py migrate --noinput
```

It should now be possible to start the deployment server with:
```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py runserver
```

  If you want to deploy the project using mod_wsgi in apache you could use `documentation/apache_praktomat_wsgi.conf` as a starting point. Don't forget to install `mod_xsendfile` to serve uploaded files.

```bash
sudo systemctl enable apache2
sudo a2enmod macro
sudo a2enmod xsendfile
sudo a2enmod ssl
sudo a2ensite default-ssl
```
Change /etc/apache2/sites-enabled/default-ssl.conf by inserting information `ServerAdmin` and `ServerName` after line `<VirtualHost _default_:443>`

```
  ServerAdmin fill in valid e-mail-adress to reach servers admin.
  ServerName  fill in FQDN of server (matching to HTTPS-Certificate.)
```
And copy the complete Apache-Macro `Praktomat` from `documentation/apache_praktomat_wsgi.conf`, with modification for your needs, just before
the `<VirtualHost _default_:443>`-Entries. Use the `Praktomat` Apache-Macro inside the `<VirtualHost _default_:443>`-Entries like you can see in
usage example `<VirtualHost *:80>` in `documentation/apache_praktomat_wsgi.conf`.

Start `Apache`.
```bash
sudo systemctl start apache2
sudo systemctl status apache2
```

  And if your Praktomat running on apache should handle non-ASCII filenames correctly, than the easyest way is activating UTF-8 support inside apache.
  Debian runs Apache with the LANG=C locale by default, which breaks uploading files with special characters in their names at least when running with mod_wsgi.
  Activating a UTF-8 locale in /etc/apache2/envvars should resolve the issue. ( see https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/6009#comment:18 )


Adding the first user
---------------------

If you use django for authentification, you might want to add a first user using

```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py createsuperuser
```

If you use single-sign-on via Shibboleth, you can already log in. After you have logged in, you can assign super user rights to yourself using

```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py makesuperuser --username=<the_user_name>
```

The username is visible under “View Account”; by default it is the e-mail address submitted by the Shibboleth server.

Update
======

1. update the source with git from github

2. backup your database (seriously!)

3. update the static files and the database:
    a) If you want to reuse your current database entries, you have to ensure, that
       the name of the database inside settings files fits to your needs.
    b) Folders for UPLOAD_ROOT and SANDBOX_DIR and STATIC_ROOT changed with "merge marathon" in February 2022.

```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py makemigrations
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py migrate --noinput
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py collectstatic --noinput --link
```

Security
========

Besides the security provided by Java (via the Security Manager Profiles found
in `src/checker/scripts/`), the praktomat supports two way to insulate student
submissions from the system:

 * With `USEPRAKTOMATTESTER = True` in the settings, external commands are
   prefixed with `sudo -u tester --`. For this to work you need to add a user
   `tester` which is also a member of the default group of the user that runs
   the praktomat (usually `praktomat`).
   ```bash
   sudo adduser tester --disabled-password
   sudo usermod tester -a -G praktomat
   sudo usermod www-data -a -G praktomat
   ```
 * With `USESAFEDOCKER = True`, external commands are prefixed with
   `safe-docker`, which you need to have installed. You can find it in the `scripts` directory of this repository.

   For this to work you need to have a docker image named `safe-docker`
   installed, which needs to have all required dependencies installed. A
   suggested docker image is available in `docker-image`, so to get started simply run

        sudo docker build -t safe-docker docker-image

   If your image is named differently, set the image name through the setting `DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME`.

We recommend `USESAFEDOCKER`, as that is what we test in practice.

When using `safe-docker` while Praktomat itself is already running inside a Docker container, you need to have a BusyBox image available. It is required for some temporary containers.

The Praktomat tries to limit the resources available to the student submissions:

 * The runtime of the submission can be limited (setting `TEST_TIMEOUT`)
 * The maximum amount of memory used can be limited (setting `TEST_MAXMEM`,
   only supported with `USESAFEDOCKER`).
 * The maximum size of a file produced by a user submission (setting
   `TEST_MAXFILESIZE`)

At the time of writing, the amount of diskspace available to the user is
unlimited, which can probably be exploited easily.

jPlag integration
=================

Praktomat provides a rudimentary, but convenient integration of the plagiarism
detection program [jPlag](https://jplag.ipd.kit.edu/). Do enable this support, you have to do these two steps:

 * Download the latest [jPlag release](https://github.com/jplag/jplag/releases) (latest tested version: v2.12.1)
 * Copy the resulting `.jar` file somewhere on the Praktomat server.
 * In the settings, set `JPLAGJAR = /full/path/to/jplag.jar`

Automating the execution of checkers
=================

To automatically run all checkers for expired tasks where not all checkers are finished yet,
there is a command called `runallcheckers`:
```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py runallcheckers
```

Use Cron (or something similar) to automate the execution of this command.
Tutors can then automatically start attesting solutions without the need of
an admin or trainer to manually run all checkers after a task expired.

PhpBB integration
=================

To access the praktomat usersessions from an phpBB follow the instructions in `src/sessionprofile/phpbb/README.txt`.


CUnit CPPUnit Checker
=================

For configuration please have a look into README_feature_CUnitCppUnit_Checker.txt.


[mailing list]: https://www.lists.kit.edu/wws/info/praktomat-users

Commit message:

Drop support for Python versions older than 3.8

README.md, after:

This is the source distribution of Praktomat, a programming course manager.

**Note:** *This is a fork of the original Praktomat repository (https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/). We created the fork because maintainers of the original repository were not responsive in merging pull requests and/or giving us commit rights. The repository contains the version of Praktomat as used at the University of Applied Sciences Offenburg, Germany. We believe that our changes are of general interest and not specific to our setup.*

Resources
=========

* Bug tracker: https://github.com/hso-praktomat/praktomat/issues
* Running Praktomat under docker: https://github.com/hso-praktomat/praktomat-docker
* Running Checkers for Praktomat with docker: https://github.com/hso-praktomat/praktomat-checkers
* Moderated [mailing list] for Praktomat administrators: praktomat-users@lists.kit.edu.

Python 3.8
==========
  The Praktomat currently requires at least Python 3.8. Older versions of Python may or may not work. Use them at your own risk.

  On Ubuntu 22.04, Python 3.10 is available by default,
  but you may need to additionaly install the packages

    python3-setuptools
    python3-psycopg2
    python3-virtualenv


General setup
=============

You need the latest version of `pip`that is compatible with the Python version used.
We also highly recommend to use `virtualenv` so your system Python installation remains clean.

If you are having trouble with

    pip install

and get a **No matching distribution found** or **Could not fetch URL** error,
try adding -v to the command to get more information:

    pip install --upgrade -v pip

If you see an error like **There was a problem confirming the ssl certificate** or **tlsv1 alert protocol version or TLSV1_ALERT_PROTOCOL_VERSION**, you need to be connecting to PyPI with a newer TLS support library.

Reason: PyPI turned off support for TLS versions 1.0 and 1.1 in April 2018
   https://pyfound.blogspot.com/2017/01/time-to-upgrade-your-python-tls-v12.html

To fix this, it might help to run the following command:

    pip install -U pip virtualenv setuptools wheel urllib3[secure]

Prerequisites: Database and Webserver
============
  We recommend to run Praktomat within Apache, using PostgreSQL as database management system.

  On a Debian or Ubuntu System, install the packages

    postgresql
    apache2-mpm-worker         (<= Ubuntu 14)
    apache2
    libapache2-mod-macro       (<= Ubuntu 14, removed in Ubuntu 16)
    libapache2-mod-wsgi-py3
    libapache2-mod-xsendfile   (version 0.12; or install version 1.0 manually)
    apache2-dev                (used by pip while installing mod_wsgi)


Pitfalls while Systemupgrades
============
  In Ubuntu 16 the package `apache2-mpm-worker` has been merged into `apache2`.
  Before upgrading to Ubuntu 16 or higher and you are in Ubuntu 14 or lower versions, than you have to edit

    /var/lib/apt/extended_state

  there change entry

    Package: apache2
    Architecture: amd64
    Auto-Installed: 1

  to

    Auto-Installed: 0

  If you don't change that value, apache2 package becomes deleted while upgrading Ubuntu.

Pitfalls after Praktomat-Update (Summer 2022)
=================

A note about `prlimit`
----------
  To make Praktomat compatible with newer Python versions, we introduce a dependency to binary executable program `prlimit`.

    util-linux (containing prlimit)

  If you have installed `util-linux` but the command `prlimit` remain unknown, your linux system may be too old.
  On some circumstances you can build `prlimit` from scources ( more about this cf. https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/pull/342#issuecomment-1219445202 )


 A note about SQLite3 and Praktomat's unit tests
----------

Unit tests which are testing Praktomat code are using `SQLite3` as database backend, depending on settings in `Praktomat/src/settings/test.py`.

Since merge of feature boxplot-taskstatistic (cf https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/pull/345 ) at 2022-07-27
your Python environment is using an too old `SQLite3` version, if tests fails with message:


    django.db.utils.OperationalError: near "(": syntax error while migrating migrationfile taskstatistics.0001_initial_TaskStatisticsDBview


In example, `SQLite3` version 3.16.2 dated to 2017-01-06 is much too old to handle the handwritten migration file `Praktomat/src/taskstatistics/migrations/0001_initial_TaskStatisticsDBview.py` correctly.

That migration file uses *SQL window functions*, which were standardized in `SQL:2003` and covered by `SQLite3` with version 3.25.0 dated to 2018-09-15. But, because of some bugs inside `SQLite3`, you cannot use that first version supporting *SQL window functions*, too.

Please use `SQLite3` Version 3.38.5 from 2022-05-06, which works for our needs.

Check your Python - SQLite dependency on command line via:

```bash
$ python -c "import sqlite3; print(\"... uses pysqlite \" + sqlite3.version +\" with SQLite \" + sqlite3.sqlite_version);"

... uses pysqlite 2.6.0 with SQLite 3.38.5
```


A note about Python and dependencies to Tcl/Tk
----------

 Since merge of feature boxplot-taskstatistic (cf https://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat/pull/345 )
 users can have a look onto whisker-boxplot diagrams.
 These diagrams where generated via `matplotlib`, which can be installed via `pip` and is listed in our `requirements` file.
 `matplotlib` loads transitive `_tkinter` module, which you cannot install via `pip`, and which have dependencies to system libraries for Tcl/Tk. (There exists a package installable via `pip` named `tk` but that package has nothing to do with what you need...)

 You can check, if your Python version and your system fullfill that dependencies in a shell:

     python -c "import lzma" && python -c "import _tkinter" && python -c "import -c"matplotlib.pyplot as plt"

 That commands should not produce any error messages.

 If `lzma` couldn't be imported, then you need to install the system library and dev package:

    apt-get install liblzma-dev lzma -y -q

 If `_tkinter` failed to load, then perhaps on your system the `_tkinter` module can be installed for your Python on a separate way.
 In example, on Debian you install the tkinter-support via system package manager:

    apt install python3-tk -y -q

 And of course you need tcl/tk on the system:

    apt install tk tk-dev

**Hint:** Praktomat's DejaGnuChecker uses `dejagnu`, which is written in `expect`. And `expect` is using `Tcl`.



Prerequisites: 3rd-Party libraries and programms
============

  Praktomat requires some 3rd-Party libraries programs to run.
  On a Ubuntu/Debian System, these can be installed by installing the following packages:

    util-linux (containing prlimit)

    libpq-dev
    zlib1g-dev
    libmysqlclient-dev (or: default-libmysqlclient-dev)
    libsasl2-dev
    libssl-dev
    libffi-dev
    openssl (for signing E-Mails)
    swig

    openjdk-11-jdk (or: openjdk-8-jdk)
    junit
    junit4
    dejagnu

    git-core

    libldap2-dev (if you want to use python-ldap==2.3.13 for connecting to ldap)

    r-base

  If you're going to use Praktomat to check Haskell submissions, you will also require the packages:

    ghc libghc-test-framework-dev libghc-test-framework-hunit-dev libghc-test-framework-quickcheck2-dev

 For Checkstyle, we recommend getting checkstyle-all-4.4.jar or checkstyle-8.14-all.jar

    https://github.com/checkstyle/checkstyle/releases/

  Documentation for checkstyle please see: https://checkstyle.org/

 If you want your users to submit Isabelle theories, add the following line to
 /etc/mime.types:

    text/x-isabelle thy


Some words of folder layout to Developer, Testing and Deployment-Setup
=====================================================

We have changed the folder layout, to keep repository-folders clean.
The name PraktomatSupport was ambiguous to us, so we change it.
=> Folders for UPLOAD_ROOT and SANDBOX_DIR and STATIC_ROOT changed.

Python variable UPLOAD_ROOT points to debug-data, test-data or work-data
dependig on manage-devel.py, manage-test.py or manage-local.py.

Python variable SANDBOX_DIR points to a folder inside UPLOAD_ROOT.

Semester folder:
```
.
  |-Praktomat   <= this is only the repository
  |  |-documentation
  |  |-media
  |  |-examples
  |  |-src
  |  |-docker-image
  |  |-wsgi
  |-static
  |-debug-data
  |  |-CheckerFiles
  |  |-SolutionArchive
  |  |-SolutionSandbox
  |-work-data
  |  |-CheckerFiles
  |  |-SolutionArchive
  |  |-SolutionSandbox
  |-test-data
  |  |-CheckerFiles
  |  |-SolutionArchive
  |  |-SolutionSandbox
```

In some files there are information that you have to change for your need:
```
Praktomat/src/settings/devel.py
Praktomat/src/settings/local.py
Praktomat/src/settings/test.py
Praktomat/src/checker/scripts/cTestrunner
Praktomat/src/checker/scripts/java.policy
Praktomat/src/checker/scripts/junit.policy
```

You can deactivate checkers and compilers in your local Praktomat instance,
just comment them out in ``` src/checker/checker/__init__.py ``` and ``` src/checker/compiler/__init__.py ```.
Do not forget to create and run a django migration in that case.

If you exchange Praktomat-Tasks (export and import) than the instance, which is used to import the task,
must have activated all needed checkers and compilers which are configured in the that task.


Developer and Tester setup
===============

Clone this repo and install the required python libs to either your system-wide
Python installation or inside a designated virtualenv (recommended).
The following describes a recommended setup using virtualenv.

```bash
git clone --recursive git://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat.git
virtualenv -p python3 --system-site-packages env/
. env/bin/activate
pip install -U pip virtualenv setuptools wheel urllib3[secure]
pip install -r Praktomat/requirements.txt
```

The initial database setup follows.
In standard development configuration `Praktomat/src/settings/devel.py`
and in configuration `Praktomat/src/settings/test.py` for running django unit tests against Praktomat
the databases are SQLite files.
   - 'UPLOAD_ROOT+/Database+PRAKTOMAT_ID' for development
   - 'UPLOAD_ROOT+/DjangoTestDatabase+PRAKTOMAT_ID' for unittesting
which are created by python on the fly.

```bash
cd Praktomat
mkdir ../debug-data/
./src/manage-devel.py migrate --noinput
./src/manage-devel.py createsuperuser
```

Start the development server.

```bash
./src/manage-devel.py runserver
```

or

```bash
pip install Werkzeug
./src/manage-devel.py runserver_plus
```

to run django unit tests

```bash
cd Praktomat
mkdir ../test-data/
./src/manage-test.py test accounts attestation checker configuration solutions tasks taskstatistics hbrs_tests
```


Deployment installation (using Apache and PostgreSQL)
=======================

Like for the development version, clone the Praktomat and install its dependencies:

```bash
git clone --recursive git://github.com/KITPraktomatTeam/Praktomat.git
virtualenv -p python3 --system-site-packages env/
. env/bin/activate
pip install -U pip virtualenv setuptools wheel urllib3[secure]
pip install -r Praktomat/requirements.txt
```

Now create a database. Using postgres on Ubuntu, this might work for creating
a database "praktomat_<PRAKTOMAT_ID>". Also edit `pg_hba.conf` to allow the access.
Your database-system should be configured to UTF-8.

To find your `pg_hba.conf` run on server commandline

```bash
cd / && cat $( sudo -u postgres psql -c 'SHOW config_file' | grep '\.conf') | grep 'pg_hba.conf' && cd ~
```
Edit that file to your needs. (Per default only connections to localhost are configured.)

```bash
sudo systemctl enable postgresql
sudo systemctl start postgresql
sudo systemctl status postgresql
sudo -u postgres createuser -DRS praktomat
sudo -u postgres createdb --encoding UTF8 -O praktomat praktomat_<PRAKTOMAT_ID>
```

The postfix <PRAKTOMAT_ID> of database name in above creation statement have to reflect the value of the python variable PRAKTOMAT_ID in `Praktomat/src/settings/local.py`.

Configure Praktomat in `Praktomat/src/settings/local.py`, which contains all settings and paths for your deployment system, too.

Create the upload directory, populate the database:

```bash
cd Praktomat
mkdir ../work-data/
./src/manage-local.py collectstatic --noinput --link
./src/manage-local.py migrate --noinput
```

It should now be possible to start the deployment server with:
```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py runserver
```

  If you want to deploy the project using mod_wsgi in apache you could use `documentation/apache_praktomat_wsgi.conf` as a starting point. Don't forget to install `mod_xsendfile` to serve uploaded files.

```bash
sudo systemctl enable apache2
sudo a2enmod macro
sudo a2enmod xsendfile
sudo a2enmod ssl
sudo a2ensite default-ssl
```
Change /etc/apache2/sites-enabled/default-ssl.conf by inserting information `ServerAdmin` and `ServerName` after line `<VirtualHost _default_:443>`

```
  ServerAdmin fill in valid e-mail-adress to reach servers admin.
  ServerName  fill in FQDN of server (matching to HTTPS-Certificate.)
```
And copy the complete Apache-Macro `Praktomat` from `documentation/apache_praktomat_wsgi.conf`, with modification for your needs, just before
the `<VirtualHost _default_:443>`-Entries. Use the `Praktomat` Apache-Macro inside the `<VirtualHost _default_:443>`-Entries like you can see in
usage example `<VirtualHost *:80>` in `documentation/apache_praktomat_wsgi.conf`.

Start `Apache`.
```bash
sudo systemctl start apache2
sudo systemctl status apache2
```

  And if your Praktomat running on apache should handle non-ASCII filenames correctly, than the easyest way is activating UTF-8 support inside apache.
  Debian runs Apache with the LANG=C locale by default, which breaks uploading files with special characters in their names at least when running with mod_wsgi.
  Activating a UTF-8 locale in /etc/apache2/envvars should resolve the issue. ( see https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/6009#comment:18 )


Adding the first user
---------------------

If you use django for authentification, you might want to add a first user using

```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py createsuperuser
```

If you use single-sign-on via Shibboleth, you can already log in. After you have logged in, you can assign super user rights to yourself using

```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py makesuperuser --username=<the_user_name>
```

The username is visible under “View Account”; by default it is the e-mail address submitted by the Shibboleth server.

Update
======

1. update the source with git from github

2. backup your database (seriously!)

3. update the static files and the database:
    a) If you want to reuse your current database entries, you have to ensure, that
       the name of the database inside settings files fits to your needs.
    b) Folders for UPLOAD_ROOT and SANDBOX_DIR and STATIC_ROOT changed with "merge marathon" in February 2022.

```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py makemigrations
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py migrate --noinput
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py collectstatic --noinput --link
```

Security
========

Besides the security provided by Java (via the Security Manager Profiles found
in `src/checker/scripts/`), the praktomat supports two way to insulate student
submissions from the system:

 * With `USEPRAKTOMATTESTER = True` in the settings, external commands are
   prefixed with `sudo -u tester --`. For this to work you need to add a user
   `tester` which is also a member of the default group of the user that runs
   the praktomat (usually `praktomat`).
   ```bash
   sudo adduser tester --disabled-password
   sudo usermod tester -a -G praktomat
   sudo usermod www-data -a -G praktomat
   ```
 * With `USESAFEDOCKER = True`, external commands are prefixed with
   `safe-docker`, which you need to have installed. You can find it in the `scripts` directory of this repository.

   For this to work you need to have a docker image named `safe-docker`
   installed, which needs to have all required dependencies installed. A
   suggested docker image is available in `docker-image`, so to get started simply run

        sudo docker build -t safe-docker docker-image

   If your image is named differently, set the image name through the setting `DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME`.

We recommend `USESAFEDOCKER`, as that is what we test in practice.

When using `safe-docker` while Praktomat itself is already running inside a Docker container, you need to have a BusyBox image available. It is required for some temporary containers.

The Praktomat tries to limit the resources available to the student submissions:

 * The runtime of the submission can be limited (setting `TEST_TIMEOUT`)
 * The maximum amount of memory used can be limited (setting `TEST_MAXMEM`,
   only supported with `USESAFEDOCKER`).
 * The maximum size of a file produced by a user submission (setting
   `TEST_MAXFILESIZE`)

At the time of writing, the amount of diskspace available to the user is
unlimited, which can probably be exploited easily.

jPlag integration
=================

Praktomat provides a rudimentary, but convenient integration of the plagiarism
detection program [jPlag](https://jplag.ipd.kit.edu/). Do enable this support, you have to do these two steps:

 * Download the latest [jPlag release](https://github.com/jplag/jplag/releases) (latest tested version: v2.12.1)
 * Copy the resulting `.jar` file somewhere on the Praktomat server.
 * In the settings, set `JPLAGJAR = /full/path/to/jplag.jar`

Automating the execution of checkers
=================

To automatically run all checkers for expired tasks where not all checkers are finished yet,
there is a command called `runallcheckers`:
```bash
./Praktomat/src/manage-local.py runallcheckers
```

Use Cron (or something similar) to automate the execution of this command.
Tutors can then automatically start attesting solutions without the need of
an admin or trainer to manually run all checkers after a task expired.

PhpBB integration
=================

To access the praktomat usersessions from an phpBB follow the instructions in `src/sessionprofile/phpbb/README.txt`.


CUnit CPPUnit Checker
=================

For configuration please have a look into README_feature_CUnitCppUnit_Checker.txt.


[mailing list]: https://www.lists.kit.edu/wws/info/praktomat-users
